---
layout: post
title: Faith for a Fairytale
---

Minutes away from where the lush waves of the Bali sea crash endlessly into the coastline of Nusa Dua the horizon melted into 4 walls where the new Asian champions were to be crowned. Murmurs followed Banun Sabri, chair of the grand finals, as she approached the podium to conclude the week-long debating festival. She spoke.

*"On a 5-4 split"*. A synchronous shock erupted over the hall. Members dressed in traditional attire looked around, mouths agape.

*"With the adj-core member in the minority-"* shock transformed into laughter. Some leapt. Most remained still. *"And the chair in the majority"*. Silence returned slowly, suffocating, as if all the air in the room was needed to voice the final words. She waited. And smiled.

*"Opposition wins"*.

The cries of the winning contingent consumed the Bali sea and the moment of history tremored across the Asian debating circuit. For Asia, it was the first time an Indian team won any major in more than a decade. For Indian debaters, it was a hope manifested after years of almost making it. And for the 3 champions, it was justification for years of taking brave risks and going against conventional wisdom.

We know the classics of success stories. A formula of dreaming big, working hard and staying on through tough times, a process our generation summarizes as the "grind". Yet the grind is only a script that emulates where people have gone. It doesn't create something new. What really set Garvit, Yasho, and Shaurya apart wasn't just their relentless effort. It was their ability to make and have faith in the choices that everyone else dismissed on instinct. It's bravery that creates something different from what we know and manifests a fairy tale in real life. I have watched them for the entirety of their debating careers and to understand how they broke India's decade-long dry spell, you have to understand the moments where everyone else thought they were crazy.

The first thing to know is they were not the circuit's chosen warriors. When I had just joined VIT Debate Society my immediate senior batch was breaking regularly in online comps at a record time. Among them was Garvit whom I learned was sidelined by most super seniors who favoured and supported others with more breaks (knockout qualifications). His batchmates spoke of him as having the deepest love for the sport. At NALSAR IV 2022, he went missing when he thought he didn't break and our contingent became a search party. We found him in time, and when it was announced he broke, he roared. Though he worked to become better, his peers' achievements were celebrated when his own were spectacular.

Even breaking at UADC in 2022 didn't get him his due recognition and he hit repeated Quarters and Semis exits (we called it the Quarters-Curse). After a NALSAR Quarters exit in 2023 and interruptions from placements and work, he had to debate less frequently. Though his version of "less frequent" was working till 9 PM and sparring from 10 AM till beyond midnight. He at last managed to create the time for an ABP run in 2025 after joining IGNOU, and here too he fell short. He was part of a new institution, was more than a year into corporate and most of his friends were preparing for competitive exams, hunting for promotions, or switching jobs. They had long since abandoned their hobbies. Every decision at that age cascades into far reaching consequences, and he did not come from generational wealth like lots of successful debaters who could take the risk. Inexplicably to the outside world, he chose to do UADC 2026, and like the very shape of the trophy he won, he was an eagle soaring over the headwinds.

But why did what seemed like madness work? The answer is because of a choice he made early in his debate career which reaped dividends now at its precipice. Three years ago the prevailing meta of the era demanded speed, volume, and aggression. Loud delivery, endless mechanizations, emotional principles, and an overwhelming wall of pre-emptive setups. The norm was that you had to run multiple complex paths to victory to survive. Garvit's idea was different, he decided to speak slowly, logically and calmly, a style we thought was reserved for EPL speakers of IONA. He believed the winning speech is the most simple speech, since that's the one easiest to understand. He never looked back, and despite having all the reasons to be a cynical person, he just wasn't that. He loved the sport, he loved the adrenaline, he held no animosity to people who were celebrated and he loved your achievements more than you loved yours. And he was goofy, calling himself "Ggdazzler" on Gmeet (yes every Gmeet). He simply wanted to play the game the way he wanted to, and so he stuck with his style. He would find a way and the truth he found is plainly visible in the finals of UADC 2026 against Tokyo A. He structured his speech around just one question: "How do you transport green energy?". The Final was won with simplicity. Garvit is the name of passion, and none are better suited to lead from the front on India's best AP team.

Then, we have Shaurya. I had taken his recruitment interview into VIT DebSoc and learnt he had some history in debate with his school being active in the WSDC format. Though he wasn't selected for the national teams, anyone could tell he was good. After a stellar start with an open semifinals at IIT Bombay he soon entered a plateau for months. Just when it seemed like he was back in form after reaching the finals of NLS in 2024, what followed was the return of a longer drought where a cliff separated his talents and expectations from reality. He was one among a batch of golden first-years at VIT DebSoc, his schoolmates had made the Indian schools team and gotten into Princeton, and despite what could be, for the wider circuit he was the second member of his BP team. Furthermore he was chosen to be president of VIT Debsoc that year and the workload took an immense toll. The lowest point was when he attempted an ABP run in 2024 where his preparation season was messy, and the results messier. At the end of it all, he met with me to discuss his future in debate and his career. Shaurya had been pursuing a 3 year degree whereas in India the norm was a 4 year one, and as such faced a significant disadvantage in the employment market. Furthermore he had paused debating since ABP and staying in debate would require him to have phenomenal performances. Finally he himself admitted to looking into further education, and missing a course because of his last ABP run didn't help. I advised him to move away from debating and instead focus on a few degrees and career paths we shortlisted based on his interests.

Instead he took a career in debate and became an employee of the Indian Schools Debating Society and joined IGNOU. Most were skeptical since debating as a career to earn money was only just picking up in the circuit, and in the context of Indian society, the norm is to be very risk averse on matters of money. But despite the skeptics he seemed happy. He returned with a generational run at IITM 2025, defeating a Worlds ESL breaking team, accumulating 80+ speaks from world renowned judges (an 84 too), and narrowly missing out on winning the whole thing. Mahor, a circuit senior, told me that one day Shaurya would break really deep at a major. But almost immediately, Shaurya's worst fears became true as the dreaded plateau returned with repeated underperformance the rest of the year. Though the Quarters and Semis turned into Finals, his disappointment was the same. And for all the best-speakers he won, he remained without a teammate for the remainder of the year, including ABP 2025. Facing various struggles in his personal life, and after not having spoken for 6 months, he had finally locked in a team for UADC 2026. And the rest is history. It was one inexplicable decision to stay that turned his stars. I've never been more happy to be proven wrong. Shaurya is the heart of resilience, a prophecy delayed, but finally fulfilled.

At last, I am grateful for having seen in almost a first person point-of-view, Yasho's debate story. His dreams were shaped first by VIT's Nepal Australs run when he told us he "just wanted to win a major" and then by seeing Manasija lift the trophy at Nalsar and breaking at UADC 2022 by defeating strong teams like Tokyo. He told me Manasija is the best in VIT's history and he wanted to become even better than him. His dedication was second to none, he watched nearly every recorded debate, there was no mock without his presence, no challenge he didn't seek out and no tab left unstalked. But the reality was most of our batch was moving away from debate since we weren't able to break and we were worried about our employment after college. The overwhelming narrative inside VIT DebSoc at the time was that debating is just a hobby and shouldn't be too serious lest it interrupt "real life". For reasons unbeknownst to us, he refused to give in and iron personned in mocks with members of other societies, and finally he formed a UADC 2023 team with his seniors Garvit and Raghav. Tragedy struck again as Raghav had to drop out due to an emergency. He called me up, and he shifted his position from first speaker (which he trained for months) to second speaker just a night before the competition. We broke. This should have been a turning point for the better. He balanced his club presidency, academics and debate to pursue the best of all three. But we plateaued for a year with mediocre performances, and despite the occasional DCA and breaks, we were far below our potential and we knew it. Two years into debate and all we had was that majors break at the start of our story. It seemed that story would end when unable to find a teammate, he participated in ABP 2024 (in the middle of the recruitment season) as a judge, and ended the tournament as a trainee.

It was a perfectly reasonable moment to quit. He was graduating, the risks he took failed, and the script demanded he move on. Instead, a fateful conversation with Vansh Chadha convinced him to judge at IIT Bombay in 2024. This was his first competition right after being a trainee at ABP and he made the grand finals, revealing to him the fickle nature of the activity. He decided to reopen the story and keep writing. I had recently come off of a NALSAR finals and we decided to try our hand at ABP next year. We motivated each other to rebuild the way we debate, abandon our ego, and have faith in discipline. During our preparation season, we heard that the tallest figure in the circuit laughed at our chances at ABP. We held our heads high, and at Diliman Pre-ABP we announced ourselves with a performance worthy of dark horses. We returned to the first battleground at Nalsar and stories are still told of Yasho sweeping the semifinals and nearly turning the finals. Yasho had been balancing his new corporate job all the while and had to work on the side even during the Nalsar finals. And just a week later, we broke at ABP with 2 rounds to spare. The celebrations were cut short with a sudden octo-finals exit, and he missed out on 10th best speaker by 1 speak. This was the end of my run, and he had to come to a decision about his own. Like many in the Indian circuit, he did not have the cushion of wealth most debaters do and unique to him his corporate job was extremely difficult. He again chose both. The memory of failed gambles did not haunt him. He joined IGNOU and worked at his office sometimes deep into the night. He would travel on weekends for competitions in different cities and travel back before the Monday morning. I saw him working before break nights and in between rounds. People around him felt he was trying to do too much but he nonetheless wanted it all. Yasho is the fiery soul of effort, and nothing can stand in its path. It was fate that he met Tokyo in the Final and he fell to his knees upon hearing he finally did it. He was the best ever.

These were the choices that made them champions. To have faith in themselves and make reality happen in just the way only you can dream it.
